RFC: Safety Tags (#3842)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-safety-tags.md

- Feature Name: safety_tag
- Start Date: 2025-07-29
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC introduces a concise safety-comment convention for unsafe code in libstd-adjacent crates:
tag every unsafe function and call with `#[safety { SP1, SP2 }]`.

Safety tags refine today’s safety-comment habits: a featherweight syntax that condenses every
requirement into a single, check-off reminder.

The following snippet [compiles] today, but we expect Clippy and rust-analyzer to enforce tag checks
and provide first-class IDE support.

[compiles]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=056cbe626a7cc92a317e38e9f54cb1fb

```rust
#![feature(custom_inner_attributes)]
#![clippy::safety(invariant::ValidPtr)] // 💡

pub mod invariant {
    #[clippy::safety::tag]
    pub fn ValidPtr() {}
}

#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr }] // 💡
pub unsafe fn read<T>(ptr: *const T) {}

fn main() {
    #[clippy::safety { ValidPtr }] // 💡
    unsafe { read(&()) };
}
```

# Motivation

> [motivation]: #motivation

Author: Thanks for comments! It's late in my timezone. I will try to update the document tomorrow.

> [motivation]: #motivation

Author: I've updated the motivation section to include four problems on current safety practices.

[`UseTree`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/use-declarations.html

Tags are treated as items so rustdoc can render their documentation and hyperlink tag references.
And rust-analyzer can offer **full IDE support**: completion, go-to-definition/declaration, and
doc-hover.

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their declaration or definition must be
evaluated against [Semantic Versioning][semver].
* Adding a tag is a **minor** change.
* Removing a tag is a **major** change.

To give dependent crates time to migrate, mark obsolete tag items with `#[deprecated]`. Clippy will
surface the deprecation warning whenever the tag is used.

[semver]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/semver.html

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Unstable Features

Currently, safety tags requires the following unstable features
* `#![feature(proc_macro_hygiene, stmt_expr_attributes)]` for tagging statements or expressions.
* `#![feature(custom_inner_attributes)]` for `#![clippy::safety {}]` imports

Since the safety-tag mechanism is implemented primarily in Clippy and rust-analyzer, no additional

> support is required from rustc.

Author: I've added "[Rationale for the Proposed Implementation](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/2130878acbbc38a481c1aa18734f364d2076ad93/text/0000-safety-tags.md#rationale-for-the-proposed-implementation)" section and extract comparison with structured safety comments to section called "[Why Not Structured Safety Comments?](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/2130878acbbc38a481c1aa18734f364d2076ad93/text/0000-safety-tags.md#why-not-structured-safety-comments)".

- Feature Name: safety_tag
- Start Date: 2025-07-29
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC introduces a concise safety-comment convention for unsafe code in libstd-adjacent crates:
tag every unsafe function and call with `#[safety { SP1, SP2 }]`.

Safety tags refine today’s safety-comment habits: a featherweight syntax that condenses every
requirement into a single, check-off reminder.

The following snippet [compiles] today, but we expect Clippy and Rust-Analyzer to enforce tag checks
and provide first-class IDE support.

[compiles]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=056cbe626a7cc92a317e38e9f54cb1fb

```rust
#![feature(custom_inner_attributes)]
#![clippy::safety(invariant::ValidPtr)] // 💡

pub mod invariant {
    #[clippy::safety::tag]
    pub fn ValidPtr() {}
}

#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr }] // 💡

> pub unsafe fn read<T>(ptr: *const T) {}

Reviewer: What about functions that take several parameters with some different, some overlapping requirements? Would it be possible to scope some tags to just some arguments (or maybe even type generics) to require the caller to discharge the requirements separately for each?

optional reason; any omission triggers a warning-by-default diagnostic that lists the missing tags
and explains each one:

```rust
unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
```

```rust
warning: `ValidPtr`, `Aligned`, `Initialized` tags are missing. Add them to `#[clippy::safety { }]`.
   --> file.rs:xxx:xxx
    |
LLL | unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
    | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ This unsafe call requires these safety tags.
    |
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::ValidPtr
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::Aligned
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::Initialized
```

The process of verifying whether a tag is present is referred to as tag discharge.

Note that it's allowed to discharge tags of unsafe callees onto the unsafe caller for unsafe
delegation or propogation:

```rust
#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }] // ✅
unsafe fn constructor<T>() -> T {
    unsafe { read(...) }
}
```

## Safety Tags as Ordinary Items

Before tagging a function, we must declare them as ordinary items with `#[clippy::safety::tag]` such
as [uninhabited] types or plain functions:

```rust
#[clippy::safety::tag]
enum ValidPtr {}

#[clippy::safety::tag]
fn Aligned() {}
```

> 

Author: Good question!

> Should the tag be an uninhabited enum, or a function? Why does it just work on any kind of item?

Semantically, a tag is just an uninhabited enum—no values are ever constructed.  

For rustdoc, however, we want to render it as a function; the resulting page is cleaner and avoids the noise of auto-trait impls. [Link1](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-safety-property-system/23252/25) and [link2](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-safety-property-system/23252/27) to previous discussion on IRLO for rendering example.

> I still think it would be much clearer to have it as a macro call like `clippy::define_safety_tag!(Aligned);`

Therefore, we still need a (possibly built-in) proc-macro that ships with `libcore`; it hides every declaration detail and is the neat, single knob users turn.  

The alternative — treating tags as non-items and writing `#![clippy::safety::declare(Aligned)]`[^1] inside a module — would forfeit two things we want to reuse: the ordinary item namespace/visibility rules from `rustc` and existing item rendering from `rustdoc`.

[^1]: I would suggest this syntax for non-item-like tag declaration.

> 

Reviewer 2: If it's just a rustdoc issue, rustdoc can be smarter.

> 

Author: Thanks. I'll add contents on feature requests for rustdoc.

> 

Reviewer 3: I should probably clarify what I meant by "a lot would need to happen," since I guess it's not a whole lot. Essentially, we would need "tool macros" to be a thing, similar to tool attributes, where the macros are explicitly ignored outside of the context of the tools.

This kind of tracks with how third-party "tools" work today: for example, `cargo-mutants` uses a no-op procedural attribute macro `mutants::skip` to mark things it should skip, and since the procedural macro is a no-op outside the tool, it doesn't affect anything. Theoretically, any tool could define a macro in a crate that does nothing and it would work fine here.

The biggest change is explicitly ignoring all macros namespaced under known tools like `clippy`, and then `clippy::define_safety_tag!` would work. Tools themselves can lint whether these macros are actually valid.

> 

Author: Oh, I see [`mutants::skip`](https://github.com/sourcefrog/cargo-mutants/blob/069006aeb2bc60f5d6cfa25ab3d307e43c57d7e1/mutants_attrs/src/lib.rs#L29-L31) and what you mean.

But I don't get why `mutants::skip` attribute needs to be defined as a proc-macro. Users of cargo-mutant can gate `mutant::skip` behind a conditional compilation:

```rust
#[cfg_attr(mutant, mutant::skip)]
fn foo() {}
```

And cargo-mutant passes extra `--cfg=mutant -Zcrate-attr=feature(register_tool) -Zcrate-attr=register_tool(mutant)` RUSTFLAGS when compiling the code. This is a usefull [trick](https://github.com/os-checker/distributed-verification/discussions/52) I learnt from kani for tool attributes.

---

While `clippy::define_safety_tag!` differs in that it produces ASTs, this is unlikely to occur: tool attributes never expand macros; expansion is the responsibility of procedural or declarative macros. (Or maybe of solely declarative macros in the future: [#3697](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3697) and [#3698](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3698))

> 

Reviewer 3: The sole purpose of the proc macro is to avoid having to gate it behind a `cfg_attr` on stable (since `register_tool` is unstable), but you're correct that it's not strictly necessary. My main point was that since attributes can be macros, it's not too unreasonable to have tool macro calls in addition to tool *attribute* macro calls.

In the case of a macro call, the tool macros would not actually expand to anything regardless of whether they're used by a tool. It would mean that the implementation to the tool is different, but not extremely different: instead of collecting a list of items that have an attached attribute and their paths, you would instead collect a list of macro call items and then create the path from the combination of the call and the path of the module the call is made in.

> 

Author: I've updated the RFC with "[Unresolved questions - Encapsulate Tag Item Declaration with define_safety_tag!](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/b077573c87122bb0972182d55a45648dca6853fd/text/0000-safety-tags.md#encapsulate-tag-item-declaration-with-define_safety_tag)" and "Future possibilities - [Better Rustdoc Rendering](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/b077573c87122bb0972182d55a45648dca6853fd/text/0000-safety-tags.md#better-rustdoc-rendering)". Also worth mentioning that uninhabited enums are the only tag items now.

## Unstable Features

Currently, safety tags requires the following unstable features
* `#![feature(proc_macro_hygiene, stmt_expr_attributes)]` for tagging statements or expressions.
* `#![feature(custom_inner_attributes)]` for `#![clippy::safety {}]` imports

Since the safety-tag mechanism is implemented primarily in Clippy and Rust-Analyzer, no additional
support is required from rustc.

But we ask the libs team to adopt safety tags for all public `unsafe` APIs in libstd, along with
their call sites. To enable experimentation, a nightly-only library feature
`#![feature(safety_tags)]` should be introduced and remain unstable until the design is finalized.

## Implementation in Clippy

Procedure:

1. Scan the crate for every item marked `#[clippy::safety::tag]`; cache the compiled tag metadata of
   upstream dependencies under `target/` for later queries.
2. Validate every `#![clippy::safety { ... }]` import by a reachability analysis that ensures every
   referenced tag is defined and accessible.
3. Verify that every unsafe call carries the required safety tags:
   * Resolve the callee, collect its declared tags, then walk outward from the call site until the

>      function’s own signature confirms these tags are listed in its `#![clippy::safety { ... }]`

Reviewer 4: On first read through, I was confused on the syntax examples separating imports (inner attribute `#![...]`) from function definitions and use sites (both outer attributes `#[...]`). 

Should this be an outer attribute `#[...]` since it's on a function signature? Or are both inner/outer attributes allowed on function definitions?

(I think this was the only place I noticed)

     attribute.
   * Tags are only discharged inside or onto an `unsafe fn`; it's an error to tag a safe function.
   * If an unsafe call lacks any required tag, emit a diagnostic whose severity (warning or error)
     is governed by the configured Clippy lint level.

Libraries in `rust-lang/rust` must enforce tag checking as a hard error, guaranteeing that every tag
definition and discharge is strictly valid.

> ## Implementation in Rust Analyzer

Reviewer 5: It feels weird to put the attributes under the `clippy` namespace if they are not a clippy-only thing. I can also expect other tools developed to analyze Rust will want to consider these attributes. I'd say put them under `diagnostics` or their own namespace.

Author: I've replaced clippy namespace with safety namespace. Restriction of single-path tool attr is solved by separating safety `requires` and `checked`. Thanks to @kennytm for the [idea](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842#discussion_r2247361847).

For instance, a severe problem may arise if the safety requirements of an API change over time:
downstream users may be unaware of such changes and thus be exposed to security risks. Therefore, we
propose to improve the current practice of writing safety comments by making them checkable through
a system of safety tags. These tags are designed to be:

* Compatible with existing safety documentation: Safety tags should be expressive enough to
  represent current safety comments, especially as rendered in today's rustdoc HTML pages.
* Usable by compiler tools for safety checking: If no safety tags are provided for an unsafe API,
  lints should be emitted to remind developers to provide safety requirements. If a safety tag is
  declared for an unsafe API but not discharged at a callsite, lints should be emitted to alert
  developers about potentially overlooked safety requirements.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Syntax of Safety Tags

Syntax of a safety tag is defined as follows:

```text
SafetyTag -> `#` `[` `clippy::safety` `{` Tags `}` `]`

Tags -> Tag (`;` Tag)*

Tag -> ID (`,` ID)* (`:` LiteralString)?

> ID -> SingleIdent | SimplePath

Author: Good idea! The proposed syntax is inspired by structured safety comments. [Previous discussion.](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-safety-property-system/23252/22)

#[clippy::safety { SP }]
#[clippy::safety { SP1, SP2 }]

#[clippy::safety { SP1: "reason" }]
#[clippy::safety { SP1: "reason"; SP2: "reason" }]

#[clippy::safety { SP1, SP2: "shared reason for the two SPs" }]
#[clippy::safety { SP1, SP2: "shared reason for the two SPs"; SP3 }]
#[clippy::safety { SP3; SP1, SP2: "shared reason for the two SPs" }]
```

`#[clippy::safety]` is a [tool attribute] that you attach to an unsafe function (or to an expression
that performs unsafe calls). Take [`ptr::read`]: its safety comment lists three requirements, so we
create three corresponding tags on the function declaration and mark each one off at the call site.

```rust
#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }] // defsite
pub unsafe fn read<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T { ... }

#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }] // callsite
unsafe { read(ptr) };
```

We can also attach comments for a tag or a group of tags to clarify how safety requirements are met:

```rust
#[clippy::safety {
  ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized: "addr range p..p+n is properly initialized from aligned memory"
  InBounded, ValidNum: "`n` won't exceed isize::MAX here, so `p.add(n)` is fine";
}]
for _ in 0..n {

>     unsafe {

Reviewer 6: The `#[clippy::safety]` attached to the `for` expression rather than the inner `unsafe`, is this expected? i'm not sure if allowing `#[clippy::safety]` be applied "at a distance" is a good idea

Author: Yes. It's the expected behavior, as it's meaningful to explain how invariants are upheld in loops. [Previous discussion.](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/136281-t-opsem/topic/Safety.20Property.20System/near/530636749)

        c ^= p.read();
        p = p.add(1);
    }
}
```

[tool attribute]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes.html#tool-attributes
[`ptr::read`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.read.html

Every safety tag declared on a function must appear in `#[clippy::safety { ... }]` together with an
optional reason; any omission triggers a warning-by-default diagnostic that lists the missing tags
and explains each one:

```rust
unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
```

```rust
warning: `ValidPtr`, `Aligned`, `Initialized` tags are missing. Add them to `#[clippy::safety { }]`.
   --> file.rs:xxx:xxx
    |
LLL | unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
    | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ This unsafe call requires these safety tags.
    |
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::ValidPtr
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::Aligned
    = NOTE: See core::ptr::invariants::Initialized
```

The process of verifying whether a tag is present is referred to as tag discharge.

Note that it's allowed to discharge tags of unsafe callees onto the unsafe caller for unsafe

> delegation or propogation:

Author: Thanks for the advice. I've updated the doc and added a "[Discharge Tags](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#discharge-tags)" section.

```rust
#[clippy::safety { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }] // ✅
unsafe fn constructor<T>() -> T {
    unsafe { read(...) }
}
```

## Safety Tags as Ordinary Items

Before tagging a function, we must declare them as ordinary items with `#[clippy::safety::tag]` such
as [uninhabited] types or plain functions:

```rust
#[clippy::safety::tag]
enum ValidPtr {}

#[clippy::safety::tag]
fn Aligned() {}
```

Tags live in their own [type namespace] carry item-level [scopes] and obey [visibility] rules,
keeping the system modular and collision-free. Since they are never referenced directly as real
items, we propose importing them uses a dedicated syntax: inner-styled or outer-styled 

> `clippy::safety::r#use` tool attribute on modules:

Author: It's not because "preventing tag usage as normal items". All tag items are used by tag operation `requires` and `checked`, we have to say there is a tag named ValidPtr, and it must be in scope. 

Conditional use statements don't convey the semantics that safety attributes are using tag items, instead it says tag items are used in  logics of user code. Surely people can use tag items if they want. Beside, import tag items via `use` will trigger unused items lints, while they are used in tags.

In this sense, importing tags are a thing from `safety` namespace, so `#![safety::import]` is the right way to express it.

Also, the paragraph is outdated, especially on tag items being uninhabited enums only.

I'm closing this conversation. Feel free to comment on updated contents.

```rust
#![clippy::safety::r#use { UseTree })] // {} signifies a delimiter here, thus () also works
```

[`UseTree`] follows the exact grammar of the `use` declaration. Some examples:

```rust
#[clippy::safety::r#use { core::ptr::invariants::* }]
mod foo;

mod bar {
    #![clippy::safety::r#use { core::ptr::invariants::{ValidPtr, Aligned} }]
}
```

That's to say:

> * Tags declared or re-exported in the current module are automatically in scope: no import required.

Reviewer 6: how are tags reexported? 

does this mean if we `#[clippy::safety::r#use { core::ptr::invariants::* }] mod foo {}`, we can refer to them as `#[clippy::safety { foo::Aligned }] unsafe ...` ?

or does this mean if we `mod foo { pub use core::ptr::invariants::*; }`, we can refer to them as `#[clippy::safety { foo::Aligned }] unsafe ...` ?

> * Tags from other modules must be brought in with the inner-tool attribute shown above.

Reviewer 6: we can't `#[clippy::safety { core::ptr::invariants::Aligned }] unsafe ...` directly without using `r#use`?

Author: We can restore `safety` without `r#use` to import tags if `safety::requires` and `safety::checked` are syntax for tagging.
[Previous discussion to why `r#use`.](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842#discussion_r2246032076)

Author: Nit: `safety::r#use` won't happen on unsafe fns or expressions. So 

```diff
-#[clippy::safety { core::ptr::invariants::Aligned }]
+#[clippy::safety { core::ptr::invariants::Aligned }] unsafe ... 
```

Author: But to be clearer, how about `#![clippy::safety::import(...)]` to avoid `use` keyword? For now, we have these syntax:

```rust
#[clippy::safety::import(...)]       # import tag items
#[clippy::safety::declare_tag(...)]  # declare a tag on items
#[clippy::safety::requires(...)]     # define tags on unsafe functions
#[clippy::safety::checked(...)]      # discharge tags on expressions containing unsafe calls
```

Reviewer 6: @zjp-CN my primary concern is that this item is saying

> <ins>① Tags from other modules</ins> must be brought in with the inner-tool <ins>② attribute shown above</ins>.

so it sounds like if you don't use that "② attribute" which is `#[r#use]`/`#[import]` you can't use any "① tags from other modules" even via full path.

* Tags are visible and available to downstream crates whenever their declaration paths are public.
* Attempting to import a tag from a private module is a **hard error**.
* Referencing a tag that has never been declared is also a **hard error**.

[uninhabited]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/glossary.html#uninhabited
[type namespace]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/names/namespaces.html
[scopes]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/names/scopes.html#item-scopes
[visibility]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/visibility-and-privacy.html
[`UseTree`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/use-declarations.html

Tags are treated as items so rustdoc can render their documentation and hyperlink tag references.
And Rust-Analyzer can offer **full IDE support**: completion, go-to-definition/declaration, and
doc-hover.

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their declaration or definition must be
evaluated against [Semantic Versioning][semver].
* Adding a tag declaration or definition is a **minor** change.

> * Removing a tag declaration or definition is a **major** change.

Author: Tag declaration and definition are different things:

```rust
#[safety::declare_tag(...)]  # declare a tag item (currently as an uninhabited enum)
enum Declaration {}

#[safety::requires(...)]     # define tags on an unsafe functions
unsafe fn attr_above_is_a_tag_definition() {}
```

For renaming a tag, I don't think it's a problem. As you observed, renaming is a two-step operation as removal and addition. The first step has already incurred a major change. As for changing the meaning of a present tag, we should mark tag item as deprecated or remove it, then define a new tag for the meaning.

* `#![feature(custom_inner_attributes)]` for `#![clippy::safety::r#use(...)]` imports

Since the safety-tag mechanism is implemented primarily in Clippy and Rust-Analyzer, no additional
support is required from rustc.

But we ask the libs team to adopt safety tags for all public `unsafe` APIs in libstd, along with
their call sites. To enable experimentation, a nightly-only library feature
`#![feature(safety_tags)]` should be introduced and remain unstable until the design is finalized.

## Implementation in Clippy

Procedure:

1. Scan the crate for every item marked `#[clippy::safety::tag]`; cache the compiled tag metadata of
   upstream dependencies under `target/` for later queries.
2. Validate every `#![clippy::safety { ... }]` import by a reachability analysis that ensures every
   referenced tag is defined and accessible.
3. Verify that every unsafe call carries the required safety tags:
   * Resolve the callee, collect its declared tags, then walk outward from the call site until the
     function’s own signature confirms these tags are listed in its `#![clippy::safety::r#use(...)]`

>      attribute.

Author: Yeah, it's a typo and should be in `safety::requires`. I've updated the whole paragraph.

>    * Tags are only discharged inside or onto an `unsafe fn`; it's an error to tag a safe function.

Author: > If the RFC really means that tags are discharged on unsafe calls

Yeah, that's right. I'll update the doc and let's focus the discussion in [this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842#discussion_r2248289374) conversation. Closing this.

   * If an unsafe call lacks any required tag, emit a diagnostic whose severity (warning or error)

>      is governed by the configured Clippy lint level.

Author: I think this is what I updated in motivation: [Granular Unsafe: How Small Is Too Small?](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/80cf23dad9206851906c7b0503a3fcb143227a8c/text/0000-safety-tags.md?plain=1#L72-L79), and safety tags are of [semantic granularity](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/80cf23dad9206851906c7b0503a3fcb143227a8c/text/0000-safety-tags.md?plain=1#L102-L103).

An example of tagging non unsafe block is [propagating safety requirements](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/80cf23dad9206851906c7b0503a3fcb143227a8c/text/0000-safety-tags.md?plain=1#L192-L200).

---

Thank you for reviews and questions. I'll try to catch up them tomorrow due to time difference.

>      is governed by the configured Clippy lint level.

Author: > procedure should be something like:

Thank you.  I've updated the whole paragraph with your suggestions.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

We propose **checkable safety comments** via Clippy’s new **safety-tag** system, addressing today’s
ad-hoc practice with four concrete gains:

1. **Shared clarity**. Authors attach a short tag above every unsafe operation; reviewers instantly
   see which invariant must hold and where it is satisfied.

2. **Versioned invariants**. Tags are a part of API; any change to their definition is a
   *semver-breaking* API change, so safety invariants evolve explicitly.

3. **Semantic granularity**. Tags must label a single unsafe call, or an expression contains single 
   unsafe call. No longer constrained by the visual boundaries of `unsafe {}`. This sidesteps the
   precision vs completeness tension of unsafe blocks, and zeros in on real unsafe operations.
   * It's viable to extend tagging to [more unsafe operations] beyond unsafe calls.
   * To enable truly semantic checking, we envision an [entity-reference] system that meticulously
     traces every unsafe related operation that could break an invariant in source code.

> 4. **Lightweight checking**. Clippy only matches tag paths. No heavyweight formal proofs, keeping

Author: As there's no tag items, the scope of a tag is limited to the unsafe function, thus two unsafe functions can have identical tag name but without ambiguity, right? Also, there's never name collision with tags from downstream crates!

On another words, we must tag on single unsafe operation instead unsafe blocks containing multiple unsafe operations to prevent ambiguity or collision. Good!

    let addr = ptr as usize;
    let aligned_addr = (addr + align - 1) & !(align - 1);

    #[safety::checked {
      Aligned = "alignment of ptr has be adjusted",
      ValidPtr, Initialized = "delegated to the caller"
    }]
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```

In this delegation case, you're able to declare a new meaningful tag for ValidPtr and Initialized
invariants, and define the new tag on `delegation` function. This practice extends to partial unsafe
delegation of multiple tag discharges:

```rust
#[safety::requires { MyInvaraint = "Invariants of A and C, but could be a more contextual name." }]
unsafe fn delegation() {
    unsafe {
        #[safety::checked { A = "delegated to the caller's MyInvaraint", B }]
        foo();
        #[safety::checked { C = "delegated to the caller's MyInvaraint", D }]
        bar();
    }
}
```

Note that discharing a tag that is not defined will raise a hard error.

## Safety Tags are a Part of an Unsafe Function

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their definition must be evaluated
against [Semantic Versioning][semver].
* Adding a tag definition is a **major** change, because new tag is missing. 

> * Removing a tag definition is a **major** change, because the tag doesn't exist.

Author: > I don't see anything suggesting that extra discharged tags are bad.

It's bad when discharging the extra tag that happens to be added to the unsafe operation, with possiblity of failure to manually verify if the tag/invariant is held when no one noticed the  warining of absent definition.

> * Removing a tag definition is a **major** change, because the tag doesn't exist.

Reviewer 6: > It's bad when discharging the extra tag that happens to be added to the unsafe operation after a while, with possiblity of failure to manually verify if the tag/invariant is upheld when no one noticed the warning of absent definition.

So consider the scenario, which the callee crate initially put `#[safety::requires(A = "condition 1")]` at v1.0, removed the tag at v1.1, and put the *same tag* back *with a different requirement* `#[safety::requires(A = "condition 2")]` at v2.0.

IMO the fault is not in the caller crate still having `#[safety::checked(A = "certification 1")]` using v1.1, because if the caller upgraded its dependency from v1.0 to v2.0 there will be no errors at all despite the requirement about `A` is totally changed.

So what's more important is ia0's suggest that "*Changing the definition of a tag in a way that requires more, is a major change*". I'd even say that this should be **prohibited** across all major versions, and if the callee crate author wants to reintroduce the same tag on the same item it must reuse the same description, or choose a different tag name.

> * Removing a tag definition is a **major** change, because the tag doesn't exist.

Author: Thank you to both of you! I've [updated](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#safety-tags-are-a-part-of-an-unsafe-function) as per your suggestions.

   items, so tags can be defined on them as well as be discharged on such operation happens.
3. Accessing a union field or an [unsafe field]:  we can extend tag definitions to such field, so
   tags must be discharged at every access point.
4. Calling some kinds of safe functions like ones marked with a target_feature or an unsafe
   attribute or in an extern block: the definition and discharge rules is the same as those of
   ordinary unsafe functions.
5. Implementing an unsafe trait: we can extend safety definitions to unsafe traits and require
   discharges in unsafe trait impls.

[unsafe field]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3458

But we believe safety requirements are almost mostly imposed by unsafe functions, so tagging a
struct, enum, or union is neither needed nor permitted.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## Better Rustdoc Rendering

Because tags are surfaced as a part of API, rustdoc can render documentation of tags by displaying
each tag name, its optional description, and possible deprecated state below the tagged function or
other unsafe item.

> ## Generate Safety Docs from Tags

Reviewer 7: Good point! And ideally, it could even add some short notice that those are safety tags, for example with a link to some HOWTO about calling an unsafe function with safety tags.

> ## Generate Safety Docs from Tags

Author: Thank you! I've moved "[Auto Generate Safety Docs from Tags](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#auto-generate-safety-docs-from-tags)" into our proposal in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842/commits/21e54312487def28899ee05fb0e046ce4c246c2b .

    }]
    unsafe { read(&()) };
}
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Safety Invariants: Forgotten by Authors, Hidden from Reviewers

To avoid the misuse of unsafe code, Rust developers are encouraged to provide clear safety comments
for unsafe APIs. Safety comments are often repetitive and may be perceived as less important
than the code itself, which makes them error-prone and increases the risk that reviewers may
overlook inaccuracies or missing safety requirements.

Recent Rust issues [#134496],[#135805], and [#135009] illustrate the problem: several libstd APIs
silently rely on the global allocator, yet their safety comments never state the crucial invariant
that any raw pointer passed to them must refer to memory allocated by that same global allocator.
The pattern is always the same.

```rust
// Ptr is possibly from another allocation.
pub unsafe fn from_raw(ptr: *const T) -> Self {
    // SmartPoiner can be Box, Arc, Rc, and Weak.
    unsafe { SmartPoiner::from_raw_in(ptr, Global) }
}
```

[#134496]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/134496
[#135805]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/135805
[#135009]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/135009

> Even if the safety documentation is complete, two problems remain:

Reviewer 8: There is another important benefit that should be called out here: what happens if the safety invariants change? Updating callsites (including in downstream consumer code) is very important and extremely easy to overlook.

Author: Yeah. That's what I wrote in [Safety Invariants Have No Semver](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#safety-invariants-have-no-semver).

propose that `#[safety]` be implicitly registered for every crate.

```rust
#![feature(register_tool)]
#![register_tool(safety)]
```

## Syntax of Safety Tags

Syntax of a safety tag is defined as follows:

```text
SafetyTag -> `#` `[` `safety::` Operation Object `]`

Operation -> requires | checked

Object -> `[` Tags `]` | `(` Tags `)` | `{` Tags `}`

Tags -> Tag (`,` Tag)* `,`?

Tag -> ID (`=` LiteralString)?

ID -> SingleIdent
```

Here are some tag examples:

```rust
#[safety::requires { SP }]
#[safety::requires { SP1 = "description1", SP2 = "description2" }]

#[safety::checked { SP }]
#[safety::checked { SP1 = "description1", SP2 = "description2" }]
```

`#[safety]` is a tool attribute with two forms to operate on safety invariants:
* `safety::requires` is placed on an unsafe function’s signature to state the safety invariants that
  callers must uphold;
* `safety::checked` is placed on an expression that wraps an unsafe call.

Take [`ptr::read`] as an example: its safety comment lists three requirements, so we create three
corresponding tags on the function declaration and mark each one off at the call site.

```rust

> #[safety::requires { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }] // defsite or definition

Author: Good point! I've updated the proposal.

Now consider forwarding invariants of unsafe callees onto the unsafe caller for unsafe delegation or
propogation:

```rust
#[safety::requires { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }]
unsafe fn propogation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
    #[safety::checked { ValidPtr, Aligned, Initialized }]
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```

Tags defined on an unsafe function must be **fully** discharged at callsites. No partial discharge:

```rust
#[safety::requires { ValidPtr, Initialized }]
unsafe fn delegation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
    #[safety::checked { Aligned }] // 💥 Error: Tags are not fully discharged. 
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```

For such partial unsafe delegations, please fully discharge tags on the callee and define needed
tags on the caller.

```rust
#[safety::requires {
  ValidPtr, Initialized: "ensure the allocation spans at least size_of::<T>() bytes past ptr"
}]
unsafe fn delegation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
    let align = mem::align_of::<T>();
    let addr = ptr as usize;
    let aligned_addr = (addr + align - 1) & !(align - 1);

    #[safety::checked {
      Aligned: "alignment of ptr has be adjusted";

>       ValidPtr, Initialized: "delegated to the caller"

Author: Yes. I've corrected them.

    }]
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```

In this delegation case, you're able to declare a new meaningful tag for ValidPtr and Initialized
invariants, and define the new tag on `delegation` function. This practice extends to partial unsafe
delegation of multiple tag discharges:

```rust
#[safety::declare_tag]
enum MyInvaraint {} // Invariants of A and C, but could be a more contextual name.

#[safety::requires { MyInvaraint }]
unsafe fn delegation() {
    unsafe {
        #[safety::checked { A: "delegated to the caller's MyInvaraint"; B }]
        foo();
        #[safety::checked { C: "delegated to the caller's MyInvaraint"; D }]
        bar();
    }
}
```

Note that discharing a tag that is not defined will raise a hard error.

## Safety Tags are a Part of an Unsafe Function

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their definition must be evaluated
against [Semantic Versioning][semver].
* Adding a tag definition is a **minor** change.
* Removing a tag definition is a **major** change. Renaming a tag definition is a two-step

>   operation of removal and addition, bringing a major change due to removal. 

Author: `@deprecated` is for better diagnostics.

Your proposal:

```rust
#[safety::requires {
  Tag1 = "...",
  Tag2 = "description",
}]
unsafe fn deprecate_a_tag() {}

// error: Tag2 is not discharged.
// warning: Tag0 is not defined on this function.
#[safety::requires { Tag0, Tag1 }]
unsafe { deprecate_a_tag() }
```

Problems with this design:
* the error says nothing about the relation between Tag0 and Tag2
  * the user has to check out release note, or discussion, or PR to know what happened
* when many tags are deprecated at the same time, the user needs more efforts to know why

 ```rust
#[safety::requires {
  Tag2 = "description",
}]
unsafe fn deprecate_tags() {}

// error: Tag2 is not discharged.
// warning: Tag0 is not defined on this function.
// warning: Tag1 is not defined on this function.
#[safety::requires { Tag0, Tag1 }]
unsafe { deprecate_a_tag() }
```

---

`@deprecated` proposal in this RFC:

```rust
#[safety::requires {
  Tag1 = "...",
  Tag2 = "description",
  Tag0 = "@deprecated Variant must be upheld with variant B now, \
         so this Tag will be removd in the future. Use Tag2 instead.",
}]
unsafe fn deprecate_a_tag() {}

// warning: Tag0 is deprecated: Variant must be upheld with variant B now,
// so this Tag will be removd in the future. Use Tag2 instead.
// error: Tag2 is not discharged.
#[safety::requires { Tag0, Tag1 }]
unsafe { deprecate_a_tag() }
```

```rust
#[safety::requires {
  Tag2 = "description",
  Tag0 = "@deprecated Variant must be upheld with variant B now, \
         so this Tag will be removd in the future. Use Tag2 instead.",
  Tag1 = "@deprecated No need to uphold this invariant. Will be removed soon.",
}]
unsafe fn deprecate_tags() {}

// warning: Tag0 is deprecated: Variant must be upheld with variant B now,
// so this Tag will be removd in the future. Use Tag2 instead.
// warning: Tag1 is deprecated: No need to uphold this invariant. Will be removed soon.
// error: Tag2 is not discharged.
#[safety::requires { Tag0, Tag1 }]
unsafe { deprecate_tags() }
```

Ofc you may argue that if invariants change drastically like this, we should mark `#[deprecated]` on `deprecate_tags`, and point to another unsafe function.

their call sites. To enable experimentation, a nightly-only library feature
`#![feature(safety_tags)]` should be introduced and remain unstable until the design is finalized.

## Implementation in Clippy

Procedure:

1. Validate `#[safety::requires]` only appears on unsafe functions if the attribute exists.
2. Validate `#[safety::checked]` on HIR nodes whose `ExprKind` is one of
   - **direct unsafe nodes**: `Call`, `MethodCall` that invoke an unsafe function/method, or
   - **indirect unsafe nodes**: `Block` (unsafe), `Let`, `Assign`, `AssignOp`.

   Algorithm for every function body:
   1. Walk the HIR; whenever an unsafe `Call`/`MethodCall` is encountered, record the unsafe callee
      and its nearest ancestor that is an *indirect unsafe node*.
   2. If the callee is annotated with safety tags, require that **either** the call itself **or**
      its recorded ancestor carries `#[safety::checked]`.
   3. Any node that carries `#[safety::checked]` must contain **exactly one** unsafe call/method;
      otherwise emit a diagnostic. *(We intentionally stop at this simple rule; splitting complex

>       unsafe expressions into separate annotated nodes is considered good style.)*

Author: Supporting such tagging means that tags in `checked` are applied to multiple unsafe operations. This results in obligations being discharged on a large scale, including nested and chained calls, as well as the same calls for different values:

```rust
unsafe {
    #[safety::checked { ValidPtr }] // `ptr` and temporary `&ptr.read() as *const ()` are valid to read
    ptr.read()
       .read()
};
```

I’d say this could lead to confusion and potential misuse, making it unclear what has been checked unless both pointers are explicitly mentioned in the reason.

I think it's less error-prone to let `safety::checked` handle atomic discharging, and introduce a new attribute named `safety::batch_checked` to support the discharging of shared tags.

```rust
unsafe {
    #[safety::batch_checked {
        ValidPtr = "`ptr` and temporary `&ptr.read() as *const ()` are valid to read"
    }]
    ptr.read()
       .read()
};

    #[safety::batch_checked {
        Aligned = "arrays are properly aligned",
        ValidForReads = "the arrays are owned by this function, and contain the copy type f32",
    }]
    unsafe {
        float32x4x4_t(
            vld1q_f32(a.as_ptr()),
            vld1q_f32(b.as_ptr()),
            vld1q_f32(c.as_ptr()),
            vld1q_f32(d.as_ptr()),
        )
    }
```

>       unsafe expressions into separate annotated nodes is considered good style.)*

Author: > I'd argue the same is true of `unsafe`, and we have the [`multiple_unsafe_ops_per_block`](https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-clippy/master/index.html#multiple_unsafe_ops_per_block) lint to deal with that. I'd expect to have a similar lint when using `#[safety::checked]` to check multiple unsafe operations.

That would echo the motivation ["Granular Unsafe: How Small Is Too Small?"](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#granular-unsafe-how-small-is-too-small).

Our principle is **semantic granularity**, so I'd just propose a new attribute `safety::batch_checked` to express shared mode of discharging, instead of a new high level linter for safety tags.

Proposed as follows

```rust
#[safety::checked(...)] // ❌ hard error
unsafe { char::from_u32_unchecked(*ptr.cast::<u32>()) }

#[safety::batch_checked(...)] // ✅
unsafe { char::from_u32_unchecked(*ptr.cast::<u32>()) }

#[safety::checked(...)] // ✅
let int_value = unsafe { *ptr.cast::<u32>() };
#[safety::checked(...)] // ✅
unsafe { char::from_u32_unchecked(int_value) }
```

instead of

```rust
#[safety::checked(...)] // 🤔 warning of shared_tags_checked
unsafe { char::from_u32_unchecked(*ptr.cast::<u32>()) }

#[allow(clippy::shared_tags_checked)] // 🤔
#[safety::checked(...)] // ✅
unsafe { char::from_u32_unchecked(*ptr.cast::<u32>()) }
```

- Feature Name: safety_tag
- Start Date: 2025-07-29
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC introduces a concise safety-comment convention for unsafe code in standard libraries:
tag every public unsafe function with `#[safety::requires]` and call with `#[safety::checked]`.

Safety tags refine today’s safety-comment habits: a featherweight syntax that condenses every
requirement into a single, check-off reminder.

The following snippet [compiles] today if we enable enough nightly features, but we expect Clippy
and Rust-Analyzer to enforce tag checks and provide first-class IDE support.

[compiles]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=322dbd93610aca05db49382802c732c3

```rust
#[safety::requires { // 💡 define safety tags on an unsafe function
    ValidPtr = "src must be [valid](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/index.html#safety) for reads",
    Aligned = "src must be properly aligned, even if T has size 0",

>     Initialized = "src must point to a properly initialized value of type T"

Author: I've updated RFC at https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842/commits/23f89428db890f7f911f2cfbd095571ae6cfa6ef to state that `snake_case` naming convention for tags, and how rustdoc should render them.

   *semver-breaking* API change, so safety invariants evolve explicitly.

3. **Semantic granularity**. Tags must label a single unsafe call, or an expression containing
   single unsafe call. No longer constrained by the visual boundaries of `unsafe {}`. This sidesteps
   the precision vs completeness tension of unsafe blocks, and zeros in on real unsafe operations.
   * It's viable to extend tags to [more unsafe operations] beyond unsafe calls.
   * To enable truly semantic checking, we envision an [entity-reference] system that meticulously
     traces every unsafe related operation that could break an invariant in source code.

4. **Lightweight checking**. Clippy only matches tags. No heavyweight formal proofs, keeping
   the system easy to adopt and understand.

[more unsafe operations]: #tagging-more-unsafe-ops
[entity-reference]: #entity-reference

## `#[safety]` Tool Attribute and Namespace

Safety tags have no effect on compilation; they merely document safety invariants. Therefore, we
propose that `#[safety]` be implicitly registered for every crate.

```rust
#![feature(register_tool)]
#![register_tool(safety)]

> ```

Reviewer 9: Through the `safety` namespace, we aim to tame `unsafe` code and address Rust’s last-mile problem in memory safety. The `safety` namespace is not only used by Clippy and rust-analyzer, but also serves as a source of safety guidance for developers (see _[Auto Generate Safety Docs from Tags](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#auto-generate-safety-docs-from-tags)_). By contrast, the [diagnostic](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/diagnostics.html#the-diagnostic-tool-attribute-namespace) namespace is primarily intended for customizing debugging messages. Mixing the two may not be advisable.

Furthermore, we may extend the `safety::requires` tags with parameters in the future, enabling them to act as formal safety specifications, similar to contracts. This feature is outside the scope of the current RFC (see _[Safety Properties with Arguments for Verification](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/tag-std/blob/main/pre-RFC.md#safety-properties-with-arguments-for-verification)_ for more details).

unsafe fn delegation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
    let align = mem::align_of::<T>();
    let addr = ptr as usize;
    let aligned_addr = (addr + align - 1) & !(align - 1);

    #[safety::checked {
      Aligned = "alignment of ptr has be adjusted",
      ValidPtr, Initialized = "delegated to the caller"
    }]
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```

In this delegation case, you're able to declare a new meaningful tag for ValidPtr and Initialized
invariants, and define the new tag on `delegation` function. This practice extends to partial unsafe
delegation of multiple tag discharges:

```rust
#[safety::requires { MyInvariant = "Invariants of A and C, but could be a more contextual name." }]
unsafe fn delegation() {
    unsafe {
        #[safety::checked { A = "delegated to the caller's MyInvariant", B }]
        foo();
        #[safety::checked { C = "delegated to the caller's MyInvariant", D }]
        bar();
    }
}
```

Note that discharing a tag that is not defined will raise a warning-by-default lint.

## Safety Tags are a Part of an Unsafe Function

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their definition must be evaluated
against [Semantic Versioning][semver].

> * Adding a tag definition is a **major** change, because new tag is missing. 

Reviewer 7: That's an interesting point and I'm curious how this is handled for regular API changes, namely:

```diff
 /// Returns the quotient of 2 numbers.
-pub fn my_div(x: u32, y: u32) -> u32;
+pub fn my_div(x: u32, y: NonZero<u32>) -> u32;
```

Is this an breaking change?

If yes, how does it differ from adding a safety pre-condition?

* registering `safety` tool in every crate to create safety namespace.

Since the safety-tag mechanism is implemented primarily in Clippy and Rust-Analyzer, no additional
significant support is required from rustc.

But we ask the libs team to adopt safety tags for all public `unsafe` APIs in libstd, along with
their call sites. To enable experimentation, a nightly-only library feature
`#![feature(safety_tags)]` should be introduced and remain unstable until the design is finalized.

## Implementation in Clippy

Procedure:

1. Scan the crate for uninhabited enums marked `#[safety::declare_tag]`; cache the compiled tag
   metadata of upstream dependencies under `target/` for later queries.
   * Raise an error if `declare_tag` is on other items, and ask readers to tag uninhabited enum.
2. Resolve and validate tags in `#![safety::import]` through a reachability analysis to ensure the
   paths are accessible.
3. Validate `#[safety::requires]` only appears on unsafe functions if the attribute exists.

4. Validate `#[safety::checked]` on HIR nodes whose `ExprKind` is one of
   - **direct unsafe nodes**: `Call`, `MethodCall` that invoke an unsafe function/method, or

>    - **indirect unsafe nodes**: `Block` (unsafe), `Let`, `Assign`, `AssignOp`.

Reviewer 6: > There's also unsafe attributes

since this RFC only concerns about expressions I think discharging unsafety on items would be out-of-scope but a possible future extension:

* `unsafe impl` an `unsafe trait`
* using an `#[unsafe(...)]` attribute
* declaring a `safe` item inside `unsafe extern`
* using `global_asm!`

> The current RFC as designed is indeed specific to library UB (actually only unsafe functions, not even unsafe traits) and doesn't address language UB (the rest of the unsafe super-powers).

Yeah but the tag name `ValidPtr` sounds very language-UB-y 🙃.

>    - **indirect unsafe nodes**: `Block` (unsafe), `Let`, `Assign`, `AssignOp`.

Reviewer 7: > since this RFC only concerns about expressions I think discharging unsafety on items would be out-of-scope

Ah good point. I didn't notice you focused on expressions. So indeed, besides focusing on expressions, this RFC also focuses on unsafe function calls specifically.

> Yeah but the tag name `ValidPtr` sounds very language-UB-y 🙃.

Yes, library UB can simply bubble-up the requirements from language UB to their API if they can't contain it. This is what functions like `ptr::read()` and `ptr::write()` have to do. So it makes sense to name those function call requirements as the requirements of the unsafe superpower the function uses internally.

>    - **indirect unsafe nodes**: `Block` (unsafe), `Let`, `Assign`, `AssignOp`.

Author: I've added ["Tagging More Unsafe Operations"](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/rfcs/blob/safety-tags/text/0000-safety-tags.md#tagging-more-unsafe-operations) section to extend tagging on unsafe operations. I'm closing this conversation. But feel free to comment on the section.

- Feature Name: safety_tag
- Start Date: 2025-07-29
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC introduces a concise safety-comment convention for unsafe code in libstd-adjacent crates:
tag every public unsafe function with `#[safety::requires]` and call with `#[safety::checked]`.

Safety tags refine today’s safety-comment habits: a featherweight syntax that condenses every
requirement into a single, check-off reminder.

The following snippet [compiles] today if we enable enough nightly features, but we expect Clippy
and Rust-Analyzer to enforce tag checks and provide first-class IDE support.

[compiles]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=8b22aebccf910428008c4423c436d81e

```rust
#![safety::import(invariant::*)] // 💡 import tag items

pub mod invariant {
    #[safety::declare_tag] // 💡 declare a tag item only on uninhabited enum
    pub enum ValidPtr() {}
}

> #[safety::requires { ValidPtr }] // 💡 define tags on unsafe functions

Reviewer 7: I don't think grouped tags should be a big issue. Reasons are only for humans, they can figure out to what they apply. Tools simply ignore the reasons, so they just see a list of tags.

Humans can use different conventions:
- `checked { Foo, Bar = "reason for Foo and Bar" }`
- `checked { Foo = "see Bar", Bar = "reason for Foo and Bar" }`

It's more important to get the overall logic right. Where are tags defined? In some empty enums or on each unsafe function?

invariants, and define the new tag on `delegation` function. This practice extends to partial unsafe
delegation of multiple tag discharges:

```rust
#[safety::requires(my_invariant = "Invariants of A and C, but could be a more contextual name.")]
unsafe fn delegation() {
    unsafe {
        #[safety::checked(a = "delegated to the caller's MyInvariant", b)]
        foo();
        #[safety::checked(c = "delegated to the caller's MyInvariant", d)]
        bar();
    }
}
```

Note that discharing a tag that is not defined will raise a warning-by-default lint.

## Safety Tags are a Part of an Unsafe Function

Tags constitute a public API; therefore, any alteration to their definition must be evaluated
against [Semantic Versioning][semver].
* Adding a tag definition is a **major** change, because new tag is missing. 
* Removing a tag definition is a **minor** change. The tag doesn't exist anymore, and discharing
  an undefined tag just emits a warning-by-default diagnostic.
* Renaming a tag definition is a **major** change, because it's the result of removal and addition.
* Changing the definition of a tag in an *equivalent* or in a way that *requires less* (the old tag

>   implies the new tag), is a **minor** change.

Author: Good catch!

Weakening the description of `valid_x` and bumping `bar` from 1.0.0 to 1.1.0 makes sense, because any `x` that was required to be "**positive** + **even**" in 1.0.0 still satisfies the safety constraint "**even**" in 1.1.0. (Also see the [previous discussion](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842/changes/BASE..5dffa30b514f27e00dc362e1a1854cfc65f8b073#r2256131985   ) on why removing a tag definition is a minor change: in this case, `valid_x` can be treated as two tags `positive_x + even_x` in 1.0.0, and becomes just `even_x` in 1.1.0.)

For soundness, here is my thought: 
If `x` is negative in `bar` 1.0.0, it breaks the safety requirements and can cause safety bugs. However, the same negative `x` will never break the requirement and is always safe to use in `bar` 1.1.0.
But is it safe for `foo` to pass a negative `x` to both `bar` 1.1.0 and 1.0.0? I think the answer is yes, because `bar` chooses to reuse the tag name and remove the requirement  `positive_x` when `bar` doesn't actually rely on the `positive_x` requirement for correctness.
In other words, if `bar` relied on the fact that `positive_x` causes safety bugs, it couldn't simply modify the description without renaming the tag! That is to say: relaxing a tag description will never cause unsoundness **if and only if** the removed requirement is nowhere relied upon.

>   implies the new tag), is a **minor** change.

Author: > I just realized that this assumes people use the correct version requirement. I'm not sure this is a realistic assumption.

For this concern, I'd suggest renaming the tag with a new description whenever you're unsure if anything relies on the relaxed behavior: this keeps semver working correctly.

>   implies the new tag), is a **minor** change.

Author: Thanks for the concise wording! I've [updated](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3842/commits/a20f5105159fa86a73c179163bb69c768939363a) it.

and Rust-Analyzer to enforce tag checks and provide first-class IDE support.

[compiles]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=6b7b341b8879bfdecb80ae72a8011a6d

```rust
#[safety::requires( // 💡 define safety tags on an unsafe function
    valid_ptr = "src must be [valid](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/index.html#safety) for reads",
    aligned = "src must be properly aligned, even if T has size 0",
    initialized = "src must point to a properly initialized value of type T"
)]
pub unsafe fn read<T>(ptr: *const T) { }

fn main() {
    #[safety::checked( // 💡 discharge safety tags on an unsafe call
        valid_ptr, aligned, initialized = "optional reason"
    )]
    unsafe { read(&()) };
}
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Safety Invariants: Forgotten by Authors, Hidden from Reviewers

To avoid the misuse of unsafe code, Rust developers are encouraged to provide clear safety comments
for unsafe APIs. Safety comments are often repetitive and may be perceived as less important
than the code itself, which makes them error-prone and increases the risk that reviewers may
overlook inaccuracies or missing safety requirements.

> Recent Rust issues [#134496],[#135805], and [#135009] illustrate the problem: several libstd APIs

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Recent Rust issues [#134496], [#135805], and [#135009] illustrate the problem: several libstd APIs
```

missing a space here

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3842/b6d0de380d85d96eba68fb6accf34d6c5fb3bd7f..a20f5105159fa86a73c179163bb69c768939363a)*

Even if the safety documentation is complete, two problems remain:

- When *writing* the call, the author may forget the inline safety comment that proves every
  invariant has been identified and upheld.  
- When *reviewing* the call, the absence of such a comment forces the auditor to reconstruct the
  required invariants from scratch, with no assurance that the author considered them at all.

## Safety Invariants Have No Semver

A severe problem may arise if the safety requirements of an API change over time: downstream users
may be unaware of such changes and thus be exposed to security risks. 

## Granular Unsafe: How Small Is Too Small?

The unsafe block faces a built-in tension:
- **Precision** demands the smallest possible scope, hence proposals for prefix or postfix `unsafe`
  operators that wrap a single unsafe call (see “[Alternatives from IRLO]” for such proposals).  
- **Completeness** demands the opposite: unsafe code often depends on surrounding safe (or other
  unsafe) code to satisfy its safety invariants, so the scope that must be considered “safe” 
  balloons outward.

[Alternatives from IRLO]: #IRLO

## Formal Contracts, Casual Burden

> [Contracts][contracts] excel at enforcing safety invariants rigorously, but they demand the

Reviewer 10: the contracts link no longer works and returns a 404, the goal was not accepted

maybe link to the markdown version at https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-project-goals/blob/main/src/2024h2/Contracts-and-invariants.md ?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3842/b6d0de380d85d96eba68fb6accf34d6c5fb3bd7f..a20f5105159fa86a73c179163bb69c768939363a)*

        )]
        c ^= p.read();

        #[safety::checked(in_bound, valid_num =
            "`n` won't exceed isize::MAX here, so `p.add(n)` is fine"
        )]
        p = p.add(1);
    }
}
```

[tool attribute]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes.html#tool-attributes
[`ptr::read`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.read.html

## Discharge Tags

When calling an unsafe function, tags defined by `#[safety::requires]` on it must be present in
`#[safety::checked]` together with an optional reason; any omission triggers a warning-by-default
diagnostic that lists the missing tags and explains each one:

```rust
unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
```

```rust
warning: `valid_ptr`, `aligned`, `initialized` tags are missing. Add them to `#[safety::checked]`
         once these invariants are confirmed to be satisfied.
   --> file.rs:xxx:xxx
    |
LLL | unsafe { ptr::read(ptr) }
    | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ This unsafe call requires these safety tags.
    |
    = NOTE: valid_ptr = "definition1"
    = NOTE: aligned = "definition2"
    = NOTE: initialized = "definition3"
```

The process of verifying whether a tag is checked is referred to as tag discharge.

> Now consider forwarding invariants of unsafe callees onto the unsafe caller for unsafe delegation or
> propogation:
> 
> ```rust
> #[safety::requires(valid_ptr = "...", aligned = "...", initialized = "...")]
> unsafe fn propogation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
>     #[safety::checked(valid_ptr, aligned, initialized)]
>     unsafe { read(ptr) }
> }
> ```

Reviewer 11: `propogate` should be `propagate` (**a**)

```suggestion
Now consider forwarding invariants of unsafe callees onto the unsafe caller for unsafe delegation or
propagation:

```rust
#[safety::requires(valid_ptr = "...", aligned = "...", initialized = "...")]
unsafe fn propagation<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T {
    #[safety::checked(valid_ptr, aligned, initialized)]
    unsafe { read(ptr) }
}
```
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3842/b6d0de380d85d96eba68fb6accf34d6c5fb3bd7f..a20f5105159fa86a73c179163bb69c768939363a)*

description of an unsafe operation, but they are never type checked. An example:

```rust
#[safety::requires(
  ValidPtr = {
    args = [ "p", "T", "len" ],
    desc = "pointer `{p}` must be valid for \
      reading and writing the `sizeof({T})*{n}` memory from it"
  }
)]

> unsafe fn foo<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T { ... }

Reviewer 12: unsafe fn foo<T>(ptr: *const T) -> T { ... }

#[safety::checked(ValidPtr(p))] // p will not be type-checked

> unsafe { bar(p) }

Reviewer 12: "Unsafe { bar}"
